# The Rational optimist
Author: Matt Ridley

- Embrace change, be rationally optimistic
- There is a great deal of human life that doesn’t change
- For culture to turn cumulative, ideas need to meet and mate.
- To create is to recombine
- Exchange is to cultural evolution as sex is to biological evolution
- A Rational optimist is one who has arrived at optimism not through temperament or instinct, but by looking at the evidence
- The way that markets in goods, services and ideas allow human beings to exchange and specialize honestly for the betterment of all

## A better today
- The environment is surely deteriorating.
- The true measure of something's worth is the hours it take to acquire it.
- Prosperity is the increase in the amout of goods or services you can earn with the same amount of work.
- **The true measure of prosperity is time.** 
- The big gains in happiness comes from living in a society that frees you to make choices about your lifestyle.
- People are programmed to desire, not to appreciate.
- Getting richer is not the only or even the best way of getting happier.
- The more individualized the nation, the more citizens enjoy their life.
- **Assuming the worst will not avert the fates. Striving to continue improving the human lot may.**
- The continuing imperfection of the world places a moral duty on the humanity to allow economic evolution to continue.
- In a sorry world, there is no safety to be found in standing still.
- Growth will resume unless prevented by the wrong policies.
- As long as new ideas can breed, then human economic progress can continue.
- The betterment of human lives will eventually resume.
- **Self-sufficiency is not the road to prosperity.**
- To produce implies that the producer desire to consume.
- **The magic of specialization and exchange**
- Exchange and specialization have wrought magic for the human species.
- Self-sufficiency is poverty.


## The collective brain: exchange and specialization after 200,000 years ago
- Natural selection is a conservative force.
- Language is the key to cultural evolution.
- Catallaxy: the ever expanding possibility generated by a growing division of labor.
- Trade is often unequal but benefits both sides.
- Exchange is a thing of explosive possibility.
- Control of fire had a far-reaching effect on human evolution.
- Human beings are the only great apes  with long pair of bonds.
- We had stuck our camp forever and were  out upon the roads.
- Barter was the trick that changed the world.
- It's rare for a predator to wipe out its prey altogether.
- Human beings could innovate their way out of trouble.
- Human beings have a deep capacity for isolationism, for fragmenting into groups that diverge from each other.
- Specialization -> Expertise -> Improvement
- Specialization would also give the specialist an excuse for investing time for develping a laborious new technique.
- Specialization would therefore create and increase the opportunities for gains from trade.
- **We innovate by making mistakes that are very occasionally improvements.**
- Human beings learn skills from each other by copying prestigious individuals.
- It was the trade networks that made the difference.
- Technology was made possible by division of labor.
- Market exchange calls forth innovation.
- Culture works by faithful imitation with a bias towards imitating prestigious individuals.
- People concentrated on learning skills that they could watch first-hand.
- Acquiring a skill costs a lot of time and effort.
- Self-sufficiency was dead tens of thousands of years ago.
- The success of human beings depends crucially, but precariously on numbers and connections.
- A few hundred people cannot sustain a sophisticated technology: trade is vital part of the story.
- Human cultural progress is a collective enterprise and it needs a dense collective brain.
- A large interconnected population meant faster cumulative invention.


> Population growth leading to diminishing returns is fiction; the induced increase in productivity is a scientific fact. - Juliam Simon

## The manufacture of virtue: barter, trust and rules after 50,000 years ago
- There is no human tribe that does not trade.
- **Trade is prehistoric and ubiquitous**
- Benevolence and friendship are necessary but not sufficient for society to function.
- Oxytocin is a physiologic signature of empathy and appears to induce a temporary attachment to others.
- Human beings are capable of empathy and are discerning trustees.
- Trust growth seems to precede income growth.
- Exchange breeds trust as much as vice versa.
- With frequent setbacks, trust has gradually and progressively grown, spread and deepened during human history because of exchange.
- The hisory of human propsperity lies in the repeated discovery of non-zero sum bargains that benefit both sides.
- Zero-sum thinking dominates the population discourse.
- Commerce is rather favorable to liberty.
- Wherever the ways of men are gentle there is commerce and wherever there is commerce the ways of men are gentle.
- Prudence might be a less bloody virtue than courage or honor or faith.
- Coercion is the opposite of freedom
- Commercial behaviour may make people more moral.
- We happen to be becoming nicer as we become  more irretrievably dependent on markers and free enterprise.
- Poverty is not a barrier to charity, but welfare is.
- When the market economy booms so does philanthrophy.
- People were enriching themselves and demanding higher standards.
- Niches are thriving.
- Liberty and welfare march hand in hand with prosperity and trade.
- The collective brain enriches the culture and stimulates spirit.
- Smaller scale => better planning
- Where commerce thrive, creativity and compassion both flourish.
- Good rules reward exchange and specialization.
- Bad rules reward confiscation and politicking.
- A country's economic freedom predicts its prosperity, better than its mineral wealth, education system or infrastructure do.
- Institutions and rules are evolutionary phenomena.
- Human history is driven by a co-evolution of rules and tools.
- The increasing specialization of the human species, and the enlarging habit of exchange, are the root cause of innovation in both.
- Institutional innovators are vital in the public sphere.
- Technological innovation are vital in the private sphere.
- Specialization is key to both.


## The feeding of the nine billion: farming after 10,000 years ago
- Farming is the extension of specialization and exchange to include other species.
- Agriculture diverts the labour of other species to providing services for human beings
- Capital is a certain quntity of labour, stocked an stored up to be employed, if necessary, upon some other occasion.
- It was agriculture that made capital possible by generating stored surpluses.
- Trade provided the incentive to specialize in formed goods and to generate surplus food.
- Agriculture was possible because of trade.
- It was agriculture that made capital possible by generating stored surpluses.
- Farming does not work in a highly volatile climate.
- Farming was just another expression of trade.
- Trade came first.
- The first farmers were already enthusiastic traders breaking free of subsistence through exchange.
- Trade comes first, not last.
- Farming works precisely because it is embedded in trading networks.
- The more wealthy somebody is the more things he acquires from specialists.
- People respond to incentives and always have done.
- People weigh costs and benefits and do what profits them.
- **The characteristic signature of poverty is a return to self-sufficiency.**
- **The characteristic signature of prosperity is increasing specialization.**
- Modern economists often exaggerate the cold-hearted rationality of consumers.
- Agriculture may have worsened sexual inequality
- Intensive farming saves nature.
- Intensification has saved 44% of this planet for wilderness.
- Intensification is the best thing that ever happened from the environmental perspective.
- HANPP - Human appropriation of Net Primary Products
- Intensifying agriculture could feed more people and still support more other species too.
- If we all turned vegetarian, the amount of land we would need would be still less, but if we turned organic, it would be more.
- The wastefulness of irrigation is a product of the low price of water.
- Global trade distributes the result to ensure that everybody gets a bit of everything.
- Substitutes will be adopted if the price rises high enough.
- The theme of specialized production / diversified consumption turns out to be the key to prosperity.
- Organic farming is low yield.
- The immense expansion of wilderness throughout the world is a wonderful goal.
- This goal can only be brought about by further intensification and change, not by retreat and organic subsistence.
- In the pursuit of quantity science may be sacrificed the nutritional quality of food.

## The triump of cities: trade after 5,000 years ago
- Monopoly rewards caution and discourages experiment.
- You cannot keep a good idea down.
- Trade is like a machine that turns potatoes into computers, or anything into anything; who would not want such a machine at their disposal?
- Cities exist for trade. They are places where people come to divide their labour, to specialize and exchange.
- Big cities have always depended on rural immigrants to sustain their numbers.
- Production was becoming more specialzed, consumption more diversified.
- Merchants make wealth, chiefs nationalize it.
- Market came long before the other appurtenances of civilization.
- Each empire was the product of trading wealth and was itself the eventual cause of that wealth's destruction.
- There was not just mutual dependence, but mutual gain.
- Intensification of trade came first.
- The urban revolution was an extension of the division of labour.
- Trade emerged from the interactions of the individuals. It evolved. Nobody was in charge.
- The income is gradually captured in the interests of the producers at the expense of the interest of the consumers.
- Commerce was the cause not the symptom of prosperity.
- Trade was the flywheel of the innovation machine.
- The snobbery of the elite towards trade has ancient roots.
- Mutual dependence and gains from trade would have emerged from unexpected places.
- Political fragmentation is often the friend, not the enemy of economic advance.
- Trade made possible the cross-fertilization of ideas that led to great discoveries.
- Plainly, there is something beneficial to the growth of the division of labour, when governments are limited, republican or fragmented.
- **Monopolies always grow complacent, stagnant and self-serving**.
- Strong governments are by definition monopolies.
- Entrepreneurs are rational and if they find that wealth can more easily be stolen than created, then they will steal.
- Humanity's great battle over the last 10,000 years has been the battle against monopoly.
- Inexorably, gains from trade could be rediscovered.
- People could become consumers again, which meant that they could also become producers.
- Empires, indeed governments, generally, tend to be good things at first and bad things the longer they last.
- A greater threat comes from government failure.
- Because it is a monopoly, government brings inefficiency and stagnation to most things it runs.
- High social status + low salaries = corruption and rent-seeking
- They kill the goose that lays the golden eggs.
- Competition was a grand incentive to European industrialisation and brake on bureaucratic suffocation, at the national as well as the corporate level.
- **Free trade causes mutual prosperity while protectionism causes poverty**.
- Free trade works for countries even if they do it and their neighbours do not.
- **Every country that tride protectionism suffered.**
- Protectionist measures exacerbated the economic collapse.
- Rural self-sufficiency is a romantic mirage.
- It is a measure of economic progress that more than half of the population can leave subsistence and seek the possibilities of a life based on the collective brain instead.
- Subsistence farming is a poverty trap and an environmental disaster.
- It is less of a race to the bottom and more of a race to raise the bottom.
- The best thing we can do for the planet is to build more skyscrapers.


## Escaping Malthus's trap: population after 1200
- The return to subsistence happens often in human history
- There is a cycle of rising and falling specilization in human populations
- Population limitation does not really apply to human beings, because of their habit of exchange and specialization
- Specialization and exchange fuelled population growth
- Top-down coercion is counter-productive and unnecessary
- Remarkably few people seem to know that the rate of increase in world population has been falling
- Throughout the world birthrates are falling
- Population growth is slowing even while death rates are falling
- Children are consumer goods but rather time consuming and demanding ones
- The more babies are likely to die, the more their parents bear.
- If we save children from dying, people will have smaller families
- **Probably by far the best policy for reducing population is to encourage female population**
- Countries lower their birth rates as they grow healthier, wealthier, better educated , more urbanised and more emancipated
- Consumption and commerce could be the friend of population control

## The release of slaves: energy after 1700
- **Capitalism exterminated slavery**
- It was fossil fuels that eventually made slavery uneconomic
- **Slaves were replaced by beasts, more out of practicality than compassion**
- The secret of the industrial revolution was shifting from current solar power to stored solar power
- Economic growth only became sustainable when it began to rely on non-renewable, non-green, non-clean power
- Some things are finite but vast, some things are infinitely renewable but very limited
- Every economic boom in history had ended in bust because renewable sources of energy ran out
- Water power though renewable is very much finite
- Fossil fules made modern living standards possible
- The mechanisation of production in the industrial revolution raised incomes across all classes
- The people who produce managed goods could also increasingly afford to consume them
- the cause and consequence of mechanisation of the amplification of one person's labour by machinery and fuel
- The industrial revolution caused a leap in the wealth generating capacity of the population
- the enlargement of the consuming classes
- Holy grail of marketing -> making it seeem to be both posh and affordable
- **Protectionism would fail, even back fire**
- a shift from low-grade self-sufficiency to slightly better production and consumption
- Leisure has a real value even to very poor people
- The harnessing of water power soon experienced diminishing returns
 - the transition from an organic economy to a mineral economy
- organic economy -> grew its own fuel
- mineral economy -> mined its own fuel
- **Industrialisation became contagious**
- Electricity's contribution to human welfare can hardly be exaggerated
- a smaller quantity of labour to produce a greater quantity of work
- that fossil fuels will run out soon is an anxiety as old as fossil fuels themselves
- Moreover, it is an undeniable if surprising fact, oftern overlooked, that Fossil fuels have spared much of the land from industrialisation
- **The renewable alternatives are landscape eating**
- To label the land-devouring monsters of renewable energy green, virtuous or clean strikes me bizarre.
- **Renewables are not green**
- Let's stop sanctifying false and minor gods
- Then environmental benefits of bio fuels are not just illusory, they are negative
- If you want to reduce CO2 in the atmosphere, replant a forest in the former farmland
- The biofuel industry is not just bad for the economy, it is bad for the planet too
- A sustainable future for 9 billion people on 1 planet is going to come from using as little land as possible
- Ruining habitats and landscapes, and extinguishing species to fuel a civilization is a medieval mistake that surely need not to be repeated.
- Civilizaiton like life itself has always been about capturing energy
- **Human history is a tale of progressively discovering and diverting sources of energy to support human lifestyle.**
- **Civilizaiton like life is a sisyphean flight from chaos**
- **Energy is not the problem, energy is the solution**
- We will need the watts from somewhere
- The chaos will prevail in the end, but it is our mission to postpone that day as long as we can and to push things in the opposite direction with all the ingenuity and determination we can muster.

## The invention of invention: increasing returns after 1800
- The greatest impact of an increasing return wave comes when the technology is democratized
- The death of distance may not be new, but it has been made affordable to all
- **The more knowledge you can generate, the more you can generate**
- The engine that is driving prosperity in the modern world is the accelerating generation of useful knowledge
- The dissemination of useful knowledge causes that useful knowledge to breed more useful knowledge
- Human race as a whole has experienced incessant change
- The possibility of new knowledge makes the steady state impossible
- Knowledge can never be gathered together in one place, it is collective not individual
- The accelerated exchange of ideas and people made possible by technology fuelled the accelerating growth of wealth
- Innovation is like a bush fire that burns brightly for a short time, then dies down before flaming up somewhere else
- perpetual innovation machine
- The generation of new useful knowledge is very far from routine, uniform , steady or continuous
- Increasing returns to innovation are possible
- No country remains for long the leader in knowledge creation
- Prosperity and success led to the emergence of predators and parasites in various forms and guises
- Again and again, the flame of innovation would splutter and die, only to flare up elsewhere
- Increasing returns would indeed peter out if innovators did not have a new wave to catch every 30 years, it seems
- 19th century - saw a rash of new ways to move people about
- 20th century - saw a rash of new ways to move information about
- speed was once a luxury
- Paradox of the modern world: People embrace technological change and hate it at the same time
- When a new invention is first propounded, in the beginning, every man objects, and the poor inventor runs the gauntloop of all petulant wits
- **Discovery does not necessarily precede invention**
- Science is much more like the daughter than the mother of technology
- Throughout the industrial revolution, scientists were the beneficiaries of new technology, much more than they were the benefactors
- Top down science played a little part in the early years of the industrial revolution
- **The way to incentivise innovation is to bring capital and talent together.**
- Most technological change comes from attempts to improve the existing technology
- Most technological change happens only rarely as a result of the application and transfer of knowledge from the ivory towers of the intelligentsia
- Splendid additions to the sum of human knowledge
- Inventors will always go where the money can be found to back them
- Private sector companies had gradually learnt to sew innovation into their culture and to set aside budgets for it.
- **The great innovators are still usually outsiders**
- The most dangerous moment in the life of a company was when it had succeeded, for then it stopped innovating.
- One solution is for companies to try to set their employees free to have like entrepreneurs.
- **Money is certainly important in driving innovation, but it is by no means paramount.**
- Innovators will not invent unless they can keep at least some of the proceeds of their inventions
- Intellectual property is very different from real property because it is useless if you keep it yourself.
- People get rich by selling each other things(and services) not ideas
- **The way to keep your customers is to keep making your own products obsolete.**
- Some times and places are more innovative than the others
- Government is also notorious for its ability to misread technical change
- Innovation is not a predictable business and it responds poorly to dirigisme from civil servants
- Ideas are having sex with other ideas from all over the planet with every increasing promiscuity
- Although Government can pay people to stumble upon new techs, it is hardly the source of most innovation
- Govt spending on R& D has no observable effect on economic growth
- Spillover is not some accidental or tiresome drawback for the inventor
- Innovators are therefore in the business of sharing
- The secret of the modern world is its gigantic interconnectedness
- Almost every technology is a hybrid
- Spillover - the fact that others pinch your ideas
- Technologies reproduce and they do so sexually
- The history of the modern world is the history of ideas meeting, mixing, mating and mutating
- Innovation is driven by free-revealing lead users
- The world is turning bottom-up again, the top-down years are coming to an end.
- Equilibrium and stagnation are not only avoidable in a free exchanging world; they are impossible
- Discover - fast breeder chain reaction
- Innovation - feedback loop
- Invention - self fulfilling prophecy
- The human race could quickly discover the limits to growth if knowledge stopped growing.
- Knowledge is not the same thing as material wealth
- We have accumulated fare more knowledge than we have lost.
- Our species collectively adds more and more to the aggregate store of human knowledge as each year passes.
- A world where perpetual innovation brings brief bursts of profit through temporary monopoly.
- Innovation accounted for growth that could not be explained by an increase in labour, land or capital.
- Innovation is an external force, a slice of luck that some economies had more of than others.
- A piece of new knowledge lies behind every net advance in human economic welfare
- A billion pages of knowledge make up the book of human prosperity
- Things like climate, geography and political institutions determined the rate of innovation and not much could be done about them.
- Innovation itself was an item of investment, that new applied knowledge was itself a product.
- The wonderful thing about knowledge is that is genuinely limitless.
- **There is not even a theoretical possibility of exhausting the supply of ideas, discoveries and inventions.**
- Beautiful feature of info systems => far vaster than physical systems
- The combinatorial vastness of the universe of possible ideas dwarfs the puny universe of physical things.
- Innovation is limitless
- Yet everybody is so pessimistic about the future?

## Turning points: pessimism after 1900
- Implicit confidence in the beneficence of progress has come to be regarded as the sign of a shallow mind.
- The human race has become a collective problem solving machine and it solves problems by changing its ways.
- The world will not continue as it is.
- **The pessimist's mistake is extrapolation: assuming that the future is just a bigger version of the past.**
- It was a world in retrospect pregnant with possibility ready to explode into modernity.
- How best we can encourage the necessary torrent of change?
- **There is a tendency to believe that pessimism is new.**
- Pessimists have always been ubiquitous and have always been feted.
- Pessimism plays into the collective refusal to believe that life is getting better.
- Individuals are personally optimistic yet socially pessimistic.
- We all walk around with a non-burdensome form of cognitive dissonance 
- About the future of society and the human race people are naturally gloomy
- **There is immense vested interest in pessimism**
- As the average age of a country's population rises, so people get more and more neophobic and gloomy.
- Nonetheless notice that things have got better, not worse
- Famine is largely history
- The history of the world is replete with examples of the extinction or near exhaustion of resources.
- Embracing dynamism means opening your mind to the possibility of posterity making a better world rather than preventing a worse one.
- The technologies changed and so the resources changed
- There was a great forest die-off due to acid rain
- **The ultra-pessimists were simply wrong**
- The human race was due a calling
- Each one is a tragedy, but a threat to humanity it is not
- the vestiges of hysteria remain
- progressive economic recession


## The two great pessimisms of today: Africa and climate after 2010
- ubiquitous pessimist vs rational optimist
- **The top-down imposition of a bottom-up system is bound to fail**
- The planner's role was to get out of the way of bottom-up evolutionary solutions
- **Grandiose goals and centralized plans have a long and disastrous history**
- Good institutions cannot usually be imposed from above
- Good institutions must evolve from below
- Good institutions imposed from above are oxymorons
- Well crafted property rights are also the key to wild life and nature conservation
- Free up the rules governing business
- It is a special set of narcissm to believe that only the recent climate is perfect.
- respectable scientific arguments / ripostes
- The richer they get the less weather dependent their econonmies will be and the more affordable they will find adaptation to climate change
- The extreme climate outcomes are so unlikely and depend on such wild assumptions.
- The four horsemen of the human apocalypse which cause the man most premature and avoidable death in poor countries:
  - dirty water
  - hunger
  - indoor smoke
  - malaria
- the threat to species are all too prosaic
- local threats are far more immediate than climate change
- Optimists are dismissed as fools, pessimists as sages
- A warmer and richer world will be more likely to improve the well-being of both human beings and ecosystems than a cooler but poorer one.
- It is the poor who are hit hardes by high energy costs
- Cutting carbon will mean costly energy
- There is just no sign of most renewable getting cheaper
- Powering the world with such renewables now is the surest way to spoil the environment
- Intermittent wind requires fossil fuel backup
- Raising the cost of energy by definition, it destroys jobs by reducing investment in other sectors.
- **Solar's big problem is its intermittent nature**
- **The obvious way to go low carbon is nuclear**
- Ingenuity is rampant as never before in this massively networked world.
- The rate of innovation is accelerating through serendipitous searching not deliberate planning.
- The future will feature ideas that are barely glints in the engineer's eys right now.
- Give local people the power to own, exploit and proft from natural resources in a sustainable way and they will usually cherish and preserve those resources.

## The catallaxy: rational optimism about 2100
- Catallaxy - spontaneuous order created by exchange and specialization
- not only factually but morally wrong
- **By far the most dangerous and indeed unsustainable thing the human race could do to itself would be turn off the innovation tap.**
- **We consistently fail to grasp how many ideas remain to be discovered.**
- Not inventing and not adopting new ideas can itself be both dangerous and immoral.
- It will be hard to snuff out the flame of innovation, because it is such an evolutionary, bottom-up phenomenon in such a networked world.
- Innovation is an evolutionary and bottom-up phenomenon
- History repeats itself as a spiral not a circle
- Thanks to the internet, each is giving according to his ability to each according to his needs, to a degree that never happened in Marxism.
- Fortunately, the flames of free thought and reason and catallaxy were kept burning
- So long as human exchange and specialization are allowed to thrive somewhere, then culture evolves whether leaders help it or hinder it,
  and the result is that prosperity spreads, technology progresses, poverty declines, disease retreats, fecundity falls, happiness increases,
  violence atrophies, freedom grows, knowledge flourishes, then environment improves and wildernesss expands
- Human nature will not change
- The same old dramas of aggression and addiction, of infatuation and indoctrination, of charm and harm, will play out, but in an ever more prosperous world.
- **Dare to be an optimist**

## Postscript
- The continuing imperfection of the world places a moral duty on humanity to allow economic evolution to continue
- The path we have been treading is on the whole heading in a good direction
- **Prosperity buys survival**
- **Much less pain will come from nature the richer we become.**


    
